1. Understand Recursive Algorithms:

Concept of Recursion:
Recursion is a technique where a function calls itself to solve a smaller version
of the same problem. Every recursive function has two parts:
- Base case: The condition where recursion stops and a direct value is returned.
- Recursive case: The function calls itself with a reduced version of the problem.

Recursion simplifies certain problems by breaking them into identical subproblems.
Financial forecasting is a natural fit — predicting value after n years is the same
as predicting after 1 year, then applying the same logic to the result for n-1 years.

For example: futureValue(10000, 0.08, 5) breaks down as:
futureValue(10800, 0.08, 4) → futureValue(11664, 0.08, 3) → ... → futureValue(value, 0.08, 0)
At years = 0, the base case returns the final compounded value.

2. Analysis:

Time Complexity:
- Our recursive algorithm makes exactly n recursive calls, one for each year.
- Each call does a constant amount of work (one multiplication).
- Time Complexity: O(n) where n is the number of years.
- Space Complexity: O(n) due to the call stack — each recursive call occupies
  a stack frame until the base case is reached.

How to Optimize the Recursive Solution:
Memoization:
If the same subproblem is computed multiple times (e.g., in a tree of recursive calls),
results can be cached to avoid recomputation. In our linear recursion this is not needed
since each year is computed exactly once, but for branching recursive forecasts
(multiple growth paths) memoization would significantly reduce computation.

Iterative Approach:
The recursive solution can be converted to an iterative one using a simple loop,
which reduces space complexity from O(n) to O(1) by eliminating the call stack:

  double value = presentValue;
  for (int i = 0; i < years; i++) {
      value = value * (1 + growthRate);
  }

For very large values of n (e.g., 10000+ years), the iterative approach is
preferred to avoid stack overflow errors from deep recursion.

Written By: Asmet Ranjan Sahoo
College: KIIT University
Email: asmetranjan25@gmail.com